ADDISON.


Joseph Addison was born on the 1st of May, 1672, at Milston, of which
his father, Lancelot Addison, was then rector, near Ambrosebury, in
Wiltshire, and, appearing weak and unlikely to live, he was christened
the same day. After the usual domestic education, which from the
character of his father may be reasonably supposed to have given him
strong impressions of piety, he was committed to the care of Mr. Naish
at Ambrosebury, and afterwards of Mr. Taylor at Salisbury.

Not to name the school or the masters of men illustrious for literature,
is a kind of historical fraud, by which honest fame is injuriously
diminished: I would therefore trace him through the whole process of his
education. In 1683, in the beginning of his twelfth year, his father,
being made Dean of Lichfield, naturally carried his family to his new
residence, and, I believe, placed him for some time, probably not long,
under Mr. Shaw, then master of the school at Lichfield, father of the
late Dr. Peter Shaw. Of this interval his biographers have given no
account, and I know it only from a story of a BARRING-OUT, told me, when
I was a boy, by Andrew Corbet, of Shropshire, who had heard it from Mr.
Pigot, his uncle.

The practice of BARRING-OUT was a savage licence, practised in many
schools to the end of the last century, by which the boys, when the
periodical vacation drew near, growing petulant at the approach of
liberty, some days before the time of regular recess, took possession
of the school, of which they barred the doors, and bade their master
defiance from the windows. It is not easy to suppose that on such
occasions the master would do more than laugh; yet, if tradition may be
credited, he often struggled hard to force or surprise the garrison. The
master, when Pigot was a schoolboy, was BARRED OUT at Lichfield; and the
whole operation, as he said, was planned and conducted by Addison.

To judge better of the probability of this story, I have inquired
when he was sent to the Chartreux; but, as he was not one of those who
enjoyed the founder's benefaction, there is no account preserved of
his admission. At the school of the Chartreux, to which he was removed
either from that of Salisbury or Lichfield, he pursued his juvenile
studies under the care of Dr. Ellis, and contracted that intimacy
with Sir Richard Steele which their joint labours have so effectually
recorded.

Of this memorable friendship the greater praise must be given to Steele.
It is not hard to love those from whom nothing can be feared; and
Addison never considered Steele as a rival; but Steele lived, as he
confesses, under an habitual subjection to the predominating genius
of Addison, whom he always mentioned with reverence, and treated with
obsequiousness.

Addison, who knew his own dignity, could not always forbear to show it,
by playing a little upon his admirer; but he was in no danger of retort;
his jests were endured without resistance or resentment. But the sneer
of jocularity was not the worst. Steele, whose imprudence of generosity,
or vanity of profusion, kept him always incurably necessitous, upon some
pressing exigence, in an evil hour, borrowed a hundred pounds of his
friend probably without much purpose of repayment; but Addison, who
seems to have had other notions of a hundred pounds, grew impatient of
delay, and reclaimed his loan by an execution. Steele felt with great
sensibility the obduracy of his creditor, but with emotions of sorrow
rather than of anger.

In 1687 he was entered into Queen's College in Oxford, where, in 1689,
the accidental perusal of some Latin verses gained him the patronage
of Dr. Lancaster, afterwards Provost of Queen's College; by whose
recommendation he was elected into Magdalen College as a demy, a term by
which that society denominates those who are elsewhere called scholars:
young men who partake of the founder's benefaction, and succeed in their
order to vacant fellowships. Here he continued to cultivate poetry and
criticism, and grew first eminent by his Latin compositions, which are
indeed entitled to particular praise. He has not confined himself to
the imitation of any ancient author, but has formed his style from
the general language, such as a diligent perusal of the productions of
different ages happened to supply. His Latin compositions seem to have
had much of his fondness, for he collected a second volume of the "Musae
Anglicanae" perhaps for a convenient receptacle, in which all his Latin
pieces are inserted, and where his poem on the Peace has the first
place. He afterwards presented the collection to Boileau, who from that
time "conceived," says Tickell, "an opinion of the English genius
for poetry." Nothing is better known of Boileau than that he had an
injudicious and peevish contempt of modern Latin, and therefore his
profession of regard was probably the effect of his civility rather than
approbation.

Three of his Latin poems are upon subjects on which perhaps he would not
have ventured to have written in his own language: "The Battle of the
Pigmies and Cranes," "The Barometer," and "A Bowling-green." When the
matter is low or scanty, a dead language, in which nothing is mean
because nothing is familiar, affords great conveniences; and by the
sonorous magnificence of Roman syllables, the writer conceals penury
of thought, and want of novelty, often from the reader and often from
himself.

In his twenty-second year he first showed his power of English poetry by
some verses addressed to Dryden; and soon after published a translation
of the greater part of the Fourth Georgic upon Bees; after which, says
Dryden, "my latter swarm is scarcely worth the hiving." About the same
time he composed the arguments prefixed to the several books of Dryden's
Virgil; and produced an Essay on the Georgics, juvenile, superficial,
and uninstructive, without much either of the scholar's learning or the
critic's penetration. His next paper of verses contained a character
of the principal English poets, inscribed to Henry Sacheverell, who was
then, if not a poet, a writer of verses; as is shown by his version of
a small part of Virgil's Georgics, published in the Miscellanies; and
a Latin encomium on Queen Mary, in the "Musae Anglicanae." These verses
exhibit all the fondness of friendship; but, on one side or the other,
friendship was afterwards too weak for the malignity of faction. In this
poem is a very confident and discriminate character of Spenser, whose
work he had then never read; so little sometimes is criticism the effect
of judgment. It is necessary to inform the reader that about this
time he was introduced by Congreve to Montague, then Chancellor of
the Exchequer: Addison was then learning the trade of a courtier, and
subjoined Montague as a poetical name to those of Cowley and of Dryden.
By the influence of Mr. Montague, concurring, according to Tickell,
with his natural modesty, he was diverted from his original design of
entering into holy orders. Montague alleged the corruption of men who
engaged in civil employments without liberal education; and declared
that, though he was represented as an enemy to the Church, he would
never do it any injury but by withholding Addison from it.

Soon after (in 1695) he wrote a poem to King William, with a rhyming
introduction addressed to Lord Somers. King William had no regard to
elegance or literature; his study was only war; yet by a choice of
Ministers, whose disposition was very different from his own, he
procured, without intention, a very liberal patronage to poetry. Addison
was caressed both by Somers and Montague.

In 1697 appeared his Latin verses on the Peace of Ryswick, which he
dedicated to Montague, and which was afterwards called, by Smith, "the
best Latin poem since the 'AEneid.'" Praise must not be too rigorously
examined; but the performance cannot be denied to be vigorous and
elegant. Having yet no public employment, he obtained (in 1699) a
pension of three hundred pounds a year, that he might be enabled to
travel. He stayed a year at Blois, probably to learn the French language
and then proceeded in his journey to Italy, which he surveyed with the
eyes of a poet. While he was travelling at leisure, he was far from
being idle: for he not only collected his observations on the country,
but found time to write his "Dialogues on Medals," and four acts of
Cato. Such, at least, is the relation of Tickell. Perhaps he only
collected his materials and formed his plan. Whatever were his other
employments in Italy, he there wrote the letter to Lord Halifax which is
justly considered as the most elegant, if not the most sublime, of his
poetical productions. But in about two years he found it necessary to
hasten home; being, as Swift informs us, distressed by indigence,
and compelled to become the tutor of a travelling squire, because his
pension was not remitted.

At his return he published his Travels, with a dedication to Lord
Somers. As his stay in foreign countries was short, his observations
are such as might be supplied by a hasty view, and consist chiefly in
comparisons of the present face of the country with the descriptions
left us by the Roman poets, from whom he made preparatory collections,
though he might have spared the trouble had he known that such
collections had been made twice before by Italian authors.

The most amusing passage of his book is his account of the minute
republic of San Marino; of many parts it is not a very severe censure to
say that they might have been written at home. His elegance of language,
and variegation of prose and verse, however, gain upon the reader; and
the book, though awhile neglected, became in time so much the favourite
of the public that before it was reprinted it rose to five times its
price.

When he returned to England (in 1702), with a meanness of appearance
which gave testimony of the difficulties to which he had been reduced,
he found his old patrons out of power, and was therefore, for a time, at
full leisure for the cultivation of his mind; and a mind so cultivated
gives reason to believe that little time was lost. But he remained not
long neglected or useless. The victory at Blenheim (1704) spread triumph
and confidence over the nation; and Lord Godolphin, lamenting to
Lord Halifax that it had not been celebrated in a manner equal to the
subject, desired him to propose it to some better poet. Halifax told
him that there was no encouragement for genius; that worthless men were
unprofitably enriched with public money, without any care to find or
employ those whose appearance might do honour to their country. To this
Godolphin replied that such abuses should in time be rectified; and
that, if a man could be found capable of the task then proposed, he
should not want an ample recompense. Halifax then named Addison, but
required that the Treasurer should apply to him in his own person.
Godolphin sent the message by Mr. Boyle, afterwards Lord Carlton; and
Addison, having undertaken the work, communicated it to the Treasury
while it was yet advanced no further than the simile of the angel,
and was immediately rewarded by succeeding Mr. Locke in the place of
Commissioner of Appeals.

In the following year he was at Hanover with Lord Halifax: and the year
after he was made Under Secretary of State, first to Sir Charles Hedges,
and in a few months more to the Earl of Sunderland. About this time the
prevalent taste for Italian operas inclined him to try what would be the
effect of a musical drama in our own language. He therefore wrote the
opera of Rosamond, which, when exhibited on the stage, was either hissed
or neglected; but, trusting that the readers would do him more justice,
he published it with an inscription to the Duchess of Marlborough--a
woman without skill, or pretensions to skill, in poetry or literature.
His dedication was therefore an instance of servile absurdity, to be
exceeded only by Joshua Barnes's dedication of a Greek Anacreon to the
Duke. His reputation had been somewhat advanced by The Tender Husband, a
comedy which Steele dedicated to him, with a confession that he owed to
him several of the most successful scenes. To this play Addison supplied
a prologue.

When the Marquis of Wharton was appointed Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
Addison attended him as his secretary; and was made Keeper of the
Records, in Birmingham's Tower, with a salary of three hundred pounds
a year. The office was little more than nominal, and the salary was
augmented for his accommodation. Interest and faction allow little to
the operation of particular dispositions or private opinions. Two men
of personal characters more opposite than those of Wharton and Addison
could not easily be brought together. Wharton was impious, profligate,
and shameless; without regard, or appearance of regard, to right and
wrong. Whatever is contrary to this may be said of Addison; but as
agents of a party they were connected, and how they adjusted their other
sentiments we cannot know.

Addison must, however, not be too hastily condemned. It is not necessary
to refuse benefits from a bad man when the acceptance implies no
approbation of his crimes; nor has the subordinate officer any
obligation to examine the opinions or conduct of those under whom he
acts, except that he may not be made the instrument of wickedness. It is
reasonable to suppose that Addison counteracted, as far as he was able,
the malignant and blasting influence of the Lieutenant; and that
at least by his intervention some good was done, and some mischief
prevented. When he was in office he made a law to himself, as Swift has
recorded, never to remit his regular fees in civility to his friends:
"for," said he, "I may have a hundred friends; and if my fee be two
guineas, I shall, by relinquishing my right, lose two hundred guineas,
and no friend gain more than two; there is therefore no proportion
between the good imparted and the evil suffered." He was in Ireland when
Steele, without any communication of his design, began the publication
of the Tatler; but he was not long concealed; by inserting a remark on
Virgil which Addison had given him he discovered himself. It is, indeed,
not easy for any man to write upon literature or common life so as not
to make himself known to those with whom he familiarly converses, and
who are acquainted with his track of study, his favourite topic, his
peculiar notions, and his habitual phrases.

If Steele desired to write in secret, he was not lucky; a single month
detected him. His first Tatler was published April 22 (1709); and
Addison's contribution appeared May 26. Tickell observes that the Tatler
began and was concluded without his concurrence. This is doubtless
literally true; but the work did not suffer much by his unconsciousness
of its commencement, or his absence at its cessation; for he continued
his assistance to December 23, and the paper stopped on January 2. He
did not distinguish his pieces by any signature; and I know not whether
his name was not kept secret till the papers were collected into
volumes.

To the Tatler, in about two months, succeeded the Spectator: a series
of essays of the same kind, but written with less levity, upon a more
regular plan, and published daily. Such an undertaking showed the
writers not to distrust their own copiousness of materials or facility
of composition, and their performance justified their confidence. They
found, however, in their progress many auxiliaries. To attempt a single
paper was no terrifying labour; many pieces were offered, and many were
received.

Addison had enough of the zeal of party; but Steele had at that time
almost nothing else. The Spectator, in one of the first papers, showed
the political tenets of its authors; but a resolution was soon taken of
courting general approbation by general topics, and subjects on which
faction had produced no diversity of sentiments--such as literature,
morality, and familiar life. To this practice they adhered with
few deviations. The ardour of Steele once broke out in praise of
Marlborough; and when Dr. Fleetwood prefixed to some sermons a preface
overflowing with Whiggish opinions, that it might be read by the Queen,
it was reprinted in the Spectator.

To teach the minuter decencies and inferior duties, to regulate the
practice of daily conversation, to correct those depravities which are
rather ridiculous than criminal, and remove those grievances which, if
they produce no lasting calamities, impress hourly vexation, was first
attempted by Casa in his book of "Manners," and Castiglione in his
"Courtier:" two books yet celebrated in Italy for purity and elegance,
and which, if they are now less read, are neglected only because they
have effected that reformation which their authors intended, and their
precepts now are no longer wanted. Their usefulness to the age in which
they were written is sufficiently attested by the translations which
almost all the nations of Europe were in haste to obtain.

This species of instruction was continued, and perhaps advanced, by the
French; among whom La Bruyere's "Manners of the Age" (though, as Boileau
remarked, it is written without connection) certainly deserves praise
for liveliness of description and justness of observation. Before the
Tatler and Spectator, if the writers for the theatre are excepted,
England had no masters of common life. No writers had yet undertaken
to reform either the savageness of neglect, or the impertinence of
civility; to show when to speak, or to be silent; how to refuse, or how
to comply. We had many books to teach us our more important duties,
and to settle opinions in philosophy or politics; but an arbiter
elegantiarum, (a judge of propriety) was yet wanting who should survey
the track of daily conversation, and free it from thorns and prickles,
which tease the passer, though they do not wound him. For this purpose
nothing is so proper as the frequent publication of short papers, which
we read, not as study, but amusement. If the subject be slight, the
treatise is short. The busy may find time, and the idle may find
patience. This mode of conveying cheap and easy knowledge began among us
in the civil war, when it was much the interest of either party to raise
and fix the prejudices of the people. At that time appeared Mercurius
Aulicus, Mercurius Rusticus, and Mercurius Civicus. It is said that when
any title grew popular, it was stolen by the antagonist, who by this
stratagem conveyed his notions to those who would not have received him
had he not worn the appearance of a friend. The tumult of those
unhappy days left scarcely any man leisure to treasure up occasional
compositions; and so much were they neglected that a complete collection
is nowhere to be found.

These Mercuries were succeeded by L'Estrange's Observator; and that by
Lesley's Rehearsal, and perhaps by others; but hitherto nothing had
been conveyed to the people, in this commodious manner, but controversy
relating to the Church or State; of which they taught many to talk, whom
they could not teach to judge.

It has been suggested that the Royal Society was instituted soon after
the Restoration to divert the attention of the people from public
discontent. The Tatler and Spectator had the same tendency; they were
published at a time when two parties--loud, restless, and violent,
each with plausible declarations, and each perhaps without any distinct
termination of its views--were agitating the nation; to minds heated
with political contest they supplied cooler and more inoffensive
reflections; and it is said by Addison, in a subsequent work, that they
had a perceptible influence upon the conversation of that time, and
taught the frolic and the gay to unite merriment with decency--an effect
which they can never wholly lose while they continue to be among the
first books by which both sexes are initiated in the elegances of
knowledge.

The Tatler and Spectator adjusted, like Casa, the unsettled practice
of daily intercourse by propriety and politeness; and, like La Bruyere,
exhibited the "Characters and Manners of the Age." The personages
introduced in these papers were not merely ideal; they were then known,
and conspicuous in various stations. Of the Tatler this is told by
Steele in his last paper; and of the Spectator by Budgell in the preface
to "Theophrastus," a book which Addison has recommended, and which
he was suspected to have revised, if he did not write it. Of those
portraits which may be supposed to be sometimes embellished, and
sometimes aggravated, the originals are now partly known, and partly
forgotten. But to say that they united the plans of two or three eminent
writers, is to give them but a small part of their due praise; they
superadded literature and criticism, and sometimes towered far above
their predecessors; and taught, with great justness of argument and
dignity of language, the most important duties and sublime truths.
All these topics were happily varied with elegant fictions and refined
allegories, and illuminated with different changes of style and
felicities of invention.

It is recorded by Budgell, that of the characters feigned or exhibited
in the Spectator, the favourite of Addison was Sir Roger de Coverley, of
whom he had formed a very delicate and discriminate idea, which he
would not suffer to be violated; and therefore when Steele had shown him
innocently picking up a girl in the Temple, and taking her to a tavern,
he drew upon himself so much of his friend's indignation that he was
forced to appease him by a promise of forbearing Sir Roger for the time
to come.

The reason which induced Cervantes to bring his hero to the grave, para
mi sola nacio Don Quixote, y yo para el, made Addison declare, with
undue vehemence of expression, that he would kill Sir Roger; being of
opinion that they were born for one another, and that any other hand
would do him wrong.

It may be doubted whether Addison ever filled up his original
delineation. He describes his knight as having his imagination somewhat
warped; but of this perversion he has made very little use. The
irregularities in Sir Roger's conduct seem not so much the effects of a
mind deviating from the beaten track of life, by the perpetual pressure
of some overwhelming idea, as of habitual rusticity, and that negligence
which solitary grandeur naturally generates. The variable weather of the
mind, the flying vapours of incipient madness, which from time to time
cloud reason without eclipsing it, it requires so much nicety to exhibit
that Addison seems to have been deterred from prosecuting his own
design.

To Sir Roger (who, as a country gentleman, appears to be a Tory, or, as
it is gently expressed, an adherent to the landed interest) is opposed
Sir Andrew Freeport, a new man, a wealthy merchant, zealous for the
moneyed interest, and a Whig. Of this contrariety of opinions, it is
probable more consequences were at first intended than could be produced
when the resolution was taken to exclude party from the paper. Sir
Andrew does but little, and that little seems not to have pleased
Addison, who, when he dismissed him from the club, changed his opinions.
Steele had made him, in the true spirit of unfeeling commerce, declare
that he "would not build an hospital for idle people;" but at last he
buys land, settles in the country, and builds, not a manufactory, but
an hospital for twelve old husbandmen--for men with whom a merchant
has little acquaintance, and whom he commonly considers with little
kindness.

Of essays thus elegant, thus instructive, and thus commodiously
distributed, it is natural to suppose the approbation general, and the
sale numerous. I once heard it observed that the sale may be calculated
by the product of the tax, related in the last number to produce more
than twenty pounds a week, and therefore stated at one-and-twenty
pounds, or three pounds ten shillings a day: this, at a halfpenny a
paper, will give sixteen hundred and eighty for the daily number. This
sale is not great; yet this, if Swift be credited, was likely to grow
less; for he declares that the Spectator, whom he ridicules for his
endless mention of the FAIR sex, had before his recess wearied his
readers.

The next year (1713), in which Cato came upon the stage, was the grand
climacteric of Addison's reputation. Upon the death of Cato he had,
as is said, planned a tragedy in the time of his travels, and had for
several years the four first acts finished, which were shown to such as
were likely to spread their admiration. They were seen by Pope and by
Cibber, who relates that Steele, when he took back the copy, told him,
in the despicable cant of literary modesty, that, whatever spirit his
friend had shown in the composition, he doubted whether he would have
courage sufficient to expose it to the censure of a British audience.
The time, however, was now come when those who affected to think liberty
in danger affected likewise to think that a stage-play might preserve
it; and Addison was importuned, in the name of the tutelary deities of
Britain, to show his courage and his zeal by finishing his design.

To resume his work he seemed perversely and unaccountably unwilling; and
by a request, which perhaps he wished to be denied, desired Mr. Hughes
to add a fifth act. Hughes supposed him serious; and, undertaking the
supplement, brought in a few days some scenes for his examination; but
he had in the meantime gone to work himself, and produced half an
act, which he afterwards completed, but with brevity irregularly
disproportionate to the foregoing parts, like a task performed with
reluctance and hurried to its conclusion.

It may yet be doubted whether Cato was made public by any change of the
author's purpose; for Dennis charged him with raising prejudices in
his own favour by false positions of preparatory criticism, and with
POISONING THE TOWN by contradicting in the Spectator the established
rule of poetical justice, because his own hero, with all his virtues,
was to fall before a tyrant. The fact is certain; the motives we must
guess.

Addison was, I believe, sufficiently disposed to bar all avenues against
all danger. When Pope brought him the prologue, which is properly
accommodated to the play, there were these words, "Britains, arise! be
worth like this approved;" meaning nothing more than--Britons, erect
and exalt yourselves to the approbation of public virtue. Addison was
frighted, lest he should be thought a promoter of insurrection, and the
line was liquidated to "Britains, attend."

Now "heavily in clouds came on the day, the great, the important day,"
when Addison was to stand the hazard of the theatre. That there might,
however, be left as little hazard as was possible, on the first night
Steele, as himself relates, undertook to pack an audience. "This," says
Pope, "had been tried for the first time in favour of the Distressed
Mother; and was now, with more efficacy, practised for Cato." The danger
was soon over. The whole nation was at that time on fire with faction.
The Whigs applauded every line in which liberty was mentioned, as a
satire on the Tories; and the Tories echoed every clap, to show that
the satire was unfelt. The story of Bolingbroke is well known; he called
Booth to his box, and gave him fifty guineas for defending the cause of
liberty so well against a perpetual dictator. "The Whigs," says Pope,
"design a second present, when they can accompany it with as good a
sentence."

The play, supported thus by the emulation of factious praise, was acted
night after night for a longer time than, I believe, the public had
allowed to any drama before; and the author, as Mrs. Porter long
afterwards related, wandered through the whole exhibition behind the
scenes with restless and unappeasable solicitude. When it was printed,
notice was given that the Queen would be pleased if it was dedicated
to her; "but, as he had designed that compliment elsewhere, he found
himself obliged," says Tickell, "by his duty on the one hand, and his
honour on the other, to send it into the world without any dedication."

Human happiness has always its abatements; the brightest sunshine of
success is not without a cloud. No sooner was Cato offered to the reader
than it was attacked by the acute malignity of Dennis with all the
violence of angry criticism. Dennis, though equally zealous, and
probably by his temper more furious than Addison, for what they called
liberty, and though a flatterer of the Whig Ministry, could not sit
quiet at a successful play; but was eager to tell friends and enemies
that they had misplaced their admirations. The world was too stubborn
for instruction; with the fate of the censurer of Corneille's Cid, his
animadversions showed his anger without effect, and Cato continued to be
praised.

Pope had now an opportunity of courting the friendship of Addison by
vilifying his old enemy, and could give resentment its full play without
appearing to revenge himself. He therefore published "A Narrative of the
Madness of John Dennis:" a performance which left the objections to the
play in their full force, and therefore discovered more desire of vexing
the critic than of defending the poet.

Addison, who was no stranger to the world, probably saw the selfishness
of Pope's friendship; and, resolving that he should have the
consequences of his officiousness to himself, informed Dennis by Steele
that he was sorry for the insult; and that, whenever he should think fit
to answer his remarks, he would do it in a manner to which nothing could
be objected.

The greatest weakness of the play is in the scenes of love, which are
said by Pope to have been added to the original plan upon a subsequent
review, in compliance with the popular practice of the stage. Such an
authority it is hard to reject; yet the love is so intimately mingled
with the whole action that it cannot easily be thought extrinsic and
adventitious; for if it were taken away, what would be left? or how were
the four acts filled in the first draft? At the publication the wits
seemed proud to pay their attendance with encomiastic verses. The best
are from an unknown hand, which will perhaps lose somewhat of their
praise when the author is known to be Jeffreys.

Cato had yet other honours. It was censured as a party-play by a scholar
of Oxford; and defended in a favourable examination by Dr. Sewel. It was
translated by Salvini into Italian, and acted at Florence; and by the
Jesuits of St. Omer's into Latin, and played by their pupils. Of this
version a copy was sent to Mr. Addison: it is to be wished that it could
be found, for the sake of comparing their version of the soliloquy with
that of Bland.

A tragedy was written on the same subject by Des Champs, a French poet,
which was translated with a criticism on the English play. But the
translator and the critic are now forgotten.

Dennis lived on unanswered, and therefore little read. Addison knew the
policy of literature too well to make his enemy important by drawing
the attention of the public upon a criticism which, though sometimes
intemperate, was often irrefragable.

While Cato was upon the stage, another daily paper, called the Guardian,
was published by Steele. To this Addison gave great assistance, whether
occasionally or by previous engagement is not known. The character of
Guardian was too narrow and too serious: it might properly enough admit
both the duties and the decencies of life, but seemed not to include
literary speculations, and was in some degree violated by merriment and
burlesque. What had the Guardian of the Lizards to do with clubs of tall
or of little men, with nests of ants, or with Strada's prolusions?
Of this paper nothing is necessary to be said but that it found many
contributors, and that it was a continuation of the Spectator, with the
same elegance and the same variety, till some unlucky sparkle from a
Tory paper set Steele's politics on fire, and wit at once blazed
into faction. He was soon too hot for neutral topics, and quitted the
Guardian to write the Englishman.

The papers of Addison are marked in the Spectator by one of the letters
in the name of Clio, and in the Guardian by a hand; whether it was, as
Tickell pretends to think, that he was unwilling to usurp the praise of
others, or as Steele, with far greater likelihood, insinuates, that he
could not without discontent impart to others any of his own. I have
heard that his avidity did not satisfy itself with the air of renown,
but that with great eagerness he laid hold on his proportion of the
profits.

Many of these papers were written with powers truly comic, with nice
discrimination of characters, and accurate observation of natural or
accidental deviations from propriety; but it was not supposed that he
had tried a comedy on the stage, till Steele after his death declared
him the author of The Drummer. This, however, Steele did not know to
be true by any direct testimony, for when Addison put the play into his
hands, he only told him it was the work of a "gentleman in the company;"
and when it was received, as is confessed, with cold disapprobation,
he was probably less willing to claim it. Tickell omitted it in his
collection; but the testimony of Steele, and the total silence of any
other claimant, has determined the public to assign it to Addison, and
it is now printed with other poetry. Steele carried The Drummer to the
play-house, and afterwards to the press, and sold the copy for fifty
guineas.

To the opinion of Steele may be added the proof supplied by the
play itself, of which the characters are such as Addison would have
delineated, and the tendency such as Addison would have promoted. That
it should have been ill received would raise wonder, did we not daily
see the capricious distribution of theatrical praise.

He was not all this time an indifferent spectator of public affairs. He
wrote, as different exigences required (in 1707), "The Present State
of the War, and the Necessity of an Augmentation;" which, however
judicious, being written on temporary topics, and exhibiting no peculiar
powers, laid hold on no attention, and has naturally sunk by its own
weight into neglect. This cannot be said of the few papers entitled the
Whig Examiner, in which is employed all the force of gay malevolence and
humorous satire. Of this paper, which just appeared and expired, Swift
remarks, with exultation, that "it is now down among the dead men." He
might well rejoice at the death of that which he could not have killed.
Every reader of every party, since personal malice is past, and the
papers which once inflamed the nation are read only as effusions of wit,
must wish for more of the Whig Examiners; for on no occasion was
the genius of Addison more vigorously exerted, and on none did the
superiority of his powers more evidently appear. His "Trial of Count
Tariff," written to expose the treaty of commerce with France, lived no
longer than the question that produced it.

Not long afterwards an attempt was made to revive the Spectator, at a
time indeed by no means favourable to literature, when the succession of
a new family to the throne filled the nation with anxiety, discord, and
confusion; and either the turbulence of the times, or the satiety of
the readers, put a stop to the publication after an experiment of eighty
numbers, which were actually collected into an eighth volume, perhaps
more valuable than any of those that went before it. Addison produced
more than a fourth part; and the other contributors are by no means
unworthy of appearing as his associates. The time that had passed during
the suspension of the Spectator, though it had not lessened his power
of humour, seems to have increased his disposition to seriousness: the
proportion of his religious to his comic papers is greater than in the
former series.

The Spectator, from its re-commencement, was published only three
times a week; and no discriminative marks were added to the papers.
To Addison, Tickell has ascribed twenty-three. The Spectator had many
contributors; and Steele, whose negligence kept him always in a hurry,
when it was his turn to furnish a paper, called loudly for the letters,
of which Addison, whose materials were more, made little use--having
recourse to sketches and hints, the product of his former studies, which
he now reviewed and completed: among these are named by Tickell the
Essays on Wit, those on the Pleasures of the Imagination, and the
Criticism on Milton.

When the House of Hanover took possession of the throne, it was
reasonable to expect that the zeal of Addison would be suitably
rewarded. Before the arrival of King George, he was made Secretary to
the Regency, and was required by his office to send notice to Hanover
that the Queen was dead, and that the throne was vacant. To do this
would not have been difficult to any man but Addison, who was so
overwhelmed with the greatness of the event, and so distracted by choice
of expression, that the lords, who could not wait for the niceties of
criticism, called Mr. Southwell, a clerk in the House, and ordered him
to despatch the message. Southwell readily told what was necessary in
the common style of business, and valued himself upon having done what
was too hard for Addison. He was better qualified for the Freeholder,
a paper which he published twice a week, from December 23, 1715, to
the middle of the next year. This was undertaken in defence of the
established Government, sometimes with argument, and sometimes with
mirth. In argument he had many equals; but his humour was singular and
matchless. Bigotry itself must be delighted with the "Tory Fox-hunter."
There are, however, some strokes less elegant and less decent; such
as the "Pretender's Journal," in which one topic of ridicule is his
poverty. This mode of abuse had been employed by Milton against King
Charles II.

                                     "Jacoboei.
     Centum exulantis viscera Marsupii regis."

And Oldmixon delights to tell of some alderman of London that he had
more money than the exiled princes; but that which might be expected
from Milton's savageness, or Oldmixon's meanness, was not suitable to
the delicacy of Addison.

Steele thought the humour of the Freeholder too nice and gentle for such
noisy times, and is reported to have said that the Ministry made use of
a lute, when they should have called for a trumpet.

This year (1716) he married the Countess Dowager of Warwick, whom he had
solicited by a very long and anxious courtship, perhaps with behaviour
not very unlike that of Sir Roger to his disdainful widow; and who, I am
afraid, diverted herself often by playing with his passion. He is said
to have first known her by becoming tutor to her son. "He formed," said
Tonson, "the design of getting that lady from the time when he was
first taken into the family." In what part of his life he obtained the
recommendation, or how long, and in what manner he lived in the family,
I know not. His advances at first were certainly timorous, but grew
bolder as his reputation and influence increased; till at last the lady
was persuaded to marry him, on terms much like those on which a Turkish
princess is espoused, to whom the Sultan is reported to pronounce,
"Daughter, I give thee this man for thy slave." The marriage, if
uncontradicted report can be credited, made no addition to his
happiness; it neither found them nor made them equal. She always
remembered her own rank, and thought herself entitled to treat with very
little ceremony the tutor of her son. Rowe's ballad of the "Despairing
Shepherd" is said to have been written, either before or after marriage,
upon this memorable pair; and it is certain that Addison has left behind
him no encouragement for ambitious love.

The year after (1717) he rose to his highest elevation, being made
Secretary of State. For this employment he might be justly supposed
qualified by long practice of business, and by his regular ascent
through other offices; but expectation is often disappointed; it is
universally confessed that he was unequal to the duties of his place.
In the House of Commons he could not speak, and therefore was useless to
the defence of the Government. "In the office," says Pope, "he could not
issue an order without losing his time in quest of fine expressions."
What he gained in rank he lost in credit; and finding by experience his
own inability, was forced to solicit his dismission, with a pension
of fifteen hundred pounds a year. His friends palliated this
relinquishment, of which both friends and enemies knew the true reason,
with an account of declining health, and the necessity of recess and
quiet. He now returned to his vocation, and began to plan literary
occupations for his future life. He purposed a tragedy on the death of
Socrates: a story of which, as Tickell remarks, the basis is narrow,
and to which I know not how love could have been appended. There would,
however, have been no want either of virtue in the sentiments, or
elegance in the language. He engaged in a nobler work, a "Defence of the
Christian Religion," of which part was published after his death; and he
designed to have made a new poetical version of the Psalms.

These pious compositions Pope imputed to a selfish motive, upon the
credit, as he owns, of Tonson; who, having quarrelled with Addison, and
not loving him, said that when he laid down the Secretary's office
he intended to take orders and obtain a bishopric; "for," said he, "I
always thought him a priest in his heart."

That Pope should have thought this conjecture of Tonson worth
remembrance, is a proof--but indeed, so far as I have found, the only
proof--that he retained some malignity from their ancient rivalry.
Tonson pretended to guess it; no other mortal ever suspected it; and
Pope might have reflected that a man who had been Secretary of State
in the Ministry of Sunderland knew a nearer way to a bishopric than by
defending religion or translating the Psalms.

It is related that he had once a design to make an English dictionary,
and that he considered Dr. Tillotson as the writer of highest authority.
There was formerly sent to me by Mr. Locker, clerk of the Leathersellers
Company, who was eminent for curiosity and literature, a collection of
examples selected from Tillotson's works, as Locker said, by Addison. It
came too late to be of use, so I inspected it but slightly, and remember
it indistinctly. I thought the passages too short. Addison, however,
did not conclude his life in peaceful studies, but relapsed, when he was
near his end, to a political dispute.

It so happened that (1718-19) a controversy was agitated with great
vehemence between those friends of long continuance, Addison and Steele.
It may be asked, in the language of Homer, what power or what cause
should set them at variance. The subject of their dispute was of great
importance. The Earl of Sunderland proposed an Act, called the "Peerage
Bill;" by which the number of Peers should be fixed, and the King
restrained from any new creation of nobility, unless when an old family
should be extinct. To this the Lords would naturally agree; and the
King, who was yet little acquainted with his own prerogative, and, as is
now well known, almost indifferent to the possessions of the Crown,
had been persuaded to consent. The only difficulty was found among
the Commons, who were not likely to approve the perpetual exclusion
of themselves and their posterity. The Bill, therefore, was eagerly
opposed, and, among others, by Sir Robert Walpole, whose speech was
published.

The Lords might think their dignity diminished by improper advancements,
and particularly by the introduction of twelve new Peers at once, to
produce a majority of Tories in the last reign: an act of authority
violent enough, yet certainly legal, and by no means to be compared with
that contempt of national right with which some time afterwards, by the
instigation of Whiggism, the Commons, chosen by the people for
three years, chose themselves for seven. But, whatever might be the
disposition of the Lords, the people had no wish to increase their
power. The tendency of the Bill, as Steele observed in a letter to the
Earl of Oxford, was to introduce an aristocracy: for a majority in the
House of Lords, so limited, would have been despotic and irresistible.

To prevent this subversion of the ancient establishment, Steele, whose
pen readily seconded his political passions, endeavoured to alarm
the nation by a pamphlet called "The Plebeian." To this an answer was
published by Addison, under the title of "The Old Whig," in which it
is not discovered that Steele was then known to be the advocate for
the Commons. Steele replied by a second "Plebeian;" and, whether by
ignorance or by courtesy, confined himself to his question, without any
personal notice of his opponent. Nothing hitherto was committed against
the laws of friendship or proprieties of decency; but controvertists
cannot long retain their kindness for each other. The "Old Whig"
answered "The Plebeian," and could not forbear some contempt of "little
DICKY, whose trade it was to write pamphlets." Dicky, however, did not
lose his settled veneration for his friend, but contented himself with
quoting some lines of Cato, which were at once detection and reproof.
The Bill was laid aside during that session, and Addison died before the
next, in which its commitment was rejected by two hundred and sixty-five
to one hundred and seventy-seven.

Every reader surely must regret that these two illustrious friends,
after so many years passed in confidence and endearment, in unity of
interest, conformity of opinion, and fellowship of study, should finally
part in acrimonious opposition. Such a controversy was "bellum plusquam
CIVILE," as Lucan expresses it. Why could not faction find other
advocates? But among the uncertainties of the human state, we are doomed
to number the instability of friendship. Of this dispute I have little
knowledge but from the "Biographia Britannica." "The Old Whig" is not
inserted in Addison's works: nor is it mentioned by Tickell in his Life;
why it was omitted, the biographers doubtless give the true reason--the
fact was too recent, and those who had been heated in the contention
were not yet cool.

The necessity of complying with times, and of sparing persons, is the
great impediment of biography. History may be formed from permanent
monuments and records: but lives can only be written from personal
knowledge, which is growing every day less, and in a short time is lost
for ever. What is known can seldom be immediately told; and when it
might be told, it is no longer known. The delicate features of the mind,
the nice discriminations of character, and the minute peculiarities of
conduct, are soon obliterated; and it is surely better that caprice,
obstinacy, frolic, and folly, however they might delight in the
description, should be silently forgotten, than that, by wanton
merriment and unseasonable detection, a pang should be given to a widow,
a daughter, a brother, or a friend. As the process of these narratives
is now bringing me among my contemporaries, I begin to feel myself
"walking upon ashes under which the fire is not extinguished," and
coming to the time of which it will be proper rather to say "nothing
that is false, than all that is true."

The end of this useful life was now approaching. Addison had for some
time been oppressed by shortness of breath, which was now aggravated
by a dropsy; and, finding his danger pressing, he prepared to die
conformably to his own precepts and professions. During this lingering
decay, he sent, as Pope relates, a message by the Earl of Warwick to
Mr. Gay, desiring to see him. Gay, who had not visited him for some
time before, obeyed the summons, and found himself received with great
kindness. The purpose for which the interview had been solicited was
then discovered. Addison told him that he had injured him; but that, if
he recovered, he would recompense him. What the injury was he did
not explain, nor did Gay ever know; but supposed that some preferment
designed for him had, by Addison's intervention, been withheld.

Lord Warwick was a young man, of very irregular life, and perhaps of
loose opinions. Addison, for whom he did not want respect, had
very diligently endeavoured to reclaim him, but his arguments and
expostulations had no effect. One experiment, however, remained to be
tried; when he found his life near its end, he directed the young lord
to be called, and when he desired with great tenderness to hear his
last injunctions, told him, "I have sent for you that you may see how a
Christian can die." What effect this awful scene had on the earl, I know
not; he likewise died himself in a short time.

In Tickell's excellent Elegy on his friend are these lines:--

     "He taught us how to live; and, oh! too high
      The price of knowledge, taught us how to die"--

in which he alludes, as he told Dr. Young, to this moving interview.

Having given directions to Mr. Tickell for the publication of his works,
and dedicated them on his death-bed to his friend Mr. Craggs, he died
June 17, 1719, at Holland House, leaving no child but a daughter.

Of his virtue it is a sufficient testimony that the resentment of party
has transmitted no charge of any crime. He was not one of those who are
praised only after death; for his merit was so generally acknowledged
that Swift, having observed that his election passed without a contest,
adds that if he proposed himself for King he would hardly have been
refused. His zeal for his party did not extinguish his kindness for the
merit of his opponents; when he was Secretary in Ireland, he refused to
intermit his acquaintance with Swift. Of his habits or external manners,
nothing is so often mentioned as that timorous or sullen taciturnity,
which his friends called modesty by too mild a name. Steele mentions
with great tenderness "that remarkable bashfulness which is a cloak that
hides and muffles merit;" and tells us "that his abilities were covered
only by modesty, which doubles the beauties which are seen, and gives
credit and esteem to all that are concealed." Chesterfield affirms that
"Addison was the most timorous and awkward man that he ever saw." And
Addison, speaking of his own deficiency in conversation, used to say of
himself that, with respect to intellectual wealth, "he could draw bills
for a thousand pounds, though he had not a guinea in his pocket." That
he wanted current coin for ready payment, and by that want was often
obstructed and distressed; and that he was often oppressed by an
improper and ungraceful timidity, every testimony concurs to prove; but
Chesterfield's representation is doubtless hyperbolical. That man cannot
be supposed very unexpert in the arts of conversation and practice of
life who, without fortune or alliance, by his usefulness and dexterity
became Secretary of State, and who died at forty-seven, after having not
only stood long in the highest rank of wit and literature, but filled
one of the most important offices of State.

The time in which he lived had reason to lament his obstinacy of
silence; "for he was," says Steele, "above all men in that talent called
humour, and enjoyed it in such perfection that I have often reflected,
after a night spent with him apart from all the world, that I had had
the pleasure of conversing with an intimate acquaintance of Terence and
Catullus, who had all their wit and nature, heightened with humour more
exquisite and delightful than any other man ever possessed." This is the
fondness of a friend; let us hear what is told us by a rival. "Addison's
conversation," says Pope, "had something in it more charming than I
have found in any other man. But this was only when familiar: before
strangers, or perhaps a single stranger, he preserved his dignity by a
stiff silence." This modesty was by no means inconsistent with a very
high opinion of his own merit. He demanded to be the first name in
modern wit; and, with Steele to echo him, used to depreciate Dryden,
whom Pope and Congreve defended against them. There is no reason to
doubt that he suffered too much pain from the prevalence of Pope's
poetical reputation; nor is it without strong reason suspected that by
some disingenuous acts he endeavoured to obstruct it; Pope was not the
only man whom he insidiously injured, though the only man of whom he
could be afraid. His own powers were such as might have satisfied him
with conscious excellence. Of very extensive learning he has indeed
given no proofs. He seems to have had small acquaintance with the
sciences, and to have read little except Latin and French; but of the
Latin poets his "Dialogues on Medals" show that he had perused the works
with great diligence and skill. The abundance of his own mind left him
little indeed of adventitious sentiments; his wit always could suggest
what the occasion demanded. He had read with critical eyes the important
volume of human life, and knew the heart of man, from the depths of
stratagem to the surface of affectation. What he knew he could easily
communicate. "This," says Steele, "was particular in this writer--that
when he had taken his resolution, or made his plan for what he designed
to write, he would walk about a room and dictate it into language with
as much freedom and ease as any one could write it down, and attend to
the coherence and grammar of what he dictated."

Pope, who can be less suspected of favouring his memory, declares that
he wrote very fluently, but was slow and scrupulous in correcting; that
many of his Spectators were written very fast, and sent immediately to
the press; and that it seemed to be for his advantage not to have time
for much revisal. "He would alter," says Pope, "anything to please
his friends before publication, but would not re-touch his pieces
afterwards; and I believe not one word of Cato to which I made an
objection was suffered to stand."

The last line of Cato is Pope's, having been originally written--

     "And oh! 'twas this that ended Cato's life."

Pope might have made more objections to the six concluding lines. In the
first couplet the words "from hence" are improper; and the second line
is taken from Dryden's Virgil. Of the next couplet, the first verse,
being included in the second, is therefore useless; and in the third
Discord is made to produce Strife.

Of the course of Addison's familiar day, before his marriage, Pope
has given a detail. He had in the house with him Budgell, and perhaps
Philips. His chief companions were Steele, Budgell, Philips [Ambrose],
Carey, Davenant, and Colonel Brett. With one or other of these he always
breakfasted. He studied all morning; then dined at a tavern; and went
afterwards to Button's. Button had been a servant in the Countess
of Warwick's family, who, under the patronage of Addison, kept a
coffee-house on the south side of Russell Street, about two doors from
Covent Garden. Here it was that the wits of that time used to assemble.
It is said when Addison had suffered any vexation from the countess, he
withdrew the company from Button's house. From the coffee-house he went
again to a tavern, where he often sat late, and drank too much wine.
In the bottle discontent seeks for comfort, cowardice for courage, and
bashfulness for confidence. It is not unlikely that Addison was first
seduced to excess by the manumission which he obtained from the servile
timidity of his sober hours. He that feels oppression from the presence
of those to whom he knows himself superior will desire to set loose his
powers of conversation; and who that ever asked succours from Bacchus
was able to preserve himself from being enslaved by his auxiliary?

Among those friends it was that Addison displayed the elegance of his
colloquial accomplishments, which may easily be supposed such as Pope
represents them. The remark of Mandeville, who, when he had passed an
evening in his company, declared that he was a parson in a tie-wig, can
detract little from his character; he was always reserved to strangers,
and was not incited to uncommon freedom by a character like that of
Mandeville.

From any minute knowledge of his familiar manners the intervention of
sixty years has now debarred us. Steele once promised Congreve and the
public a complete description of his character; but the promises of
authors are like the vows of lovers. Steele thought no more on his
design, or thought on it with anxiety that at last disgusted him, and
left his friend in the hands of Tickell.

One slight lineament of his character Swift has preserved. It was
his practice, when he found any man invincibly wrong, to flatter his
opinions by acquiescence, and sink him yet deeper in absurdity. This
artifice of mischief was admired by Stella; and Swift seems to approve
her admiration. His works will supply some information. It appears, from
the various pictures of the world, that, with all his bashfulness, he
had conversed with many distinct classes of men, had surveyed their
ways with very diligent observation, and marked with great acuteness
the effects of different modes of life. He was a man in whose presence
nothing reprehensible was out of danger; quick in discerning whatever
was wrong or ridiculous, and not unwilling to expose it. "There are,"
says Steele, "in his writings many oblique strokes upon some of the
wittiest men of the age." His delight was more to excite merriment than
detestation; and he detects follies rather than crimes. If any judgment
be made from his books of his moral character, nothing will be found but
purity and excellence. Knowledge of mankind, indeed, less extensive
than that of Addison, will show that to write, and to live, are very
different. Many who praise virtue, do no more than praise it. Yet it is
reasonable to believe that Addison's professions and practice were at no
great variance, since amidst that storm of faction in which most of
his life was passed, though his station made him conspicuous, and his
activity made him formidable, the character given him by his friends
was never contradicted by his enemies. Of those with whom interest or
opinion united him he had not only the esteem, but the kindness; and
of others whom the violence of opposition drove against him, though he
might lose the love, he retained the reverence.

It is justly observed by Tickell that he employed wit on the side of
virtue and religion. He not only made the proper use of wit himself, but
taught it to others; and from his time it has been generally subservient
to the cause of reason and of truth. He has dissipated the prejudice
that had long connected gaiety with vice, and easiness of manners with
laxity of principles. He has restored virtue to its dignity, and taught
innocence not to be ashamed. This is an elevation of literary character
"above all Greek, above all Roman fame." No greater felicity can genius
attain than that of having purified intellectual pleasure, separated
mirth from indecency, and wit from licentiousness; of having taught
a succession of writers to bring elegance and gaiety to the aid of
goodness; and, if I may use expressions yet more awful, of having
"turned many to righteousness."

Addison, in his life and for some time afterwards, was considered by
a greater part of readers as supremely excelling both in poetry and
criticism. Part of his reputation may be probably ascribed to the
advancement of his fortune; when, as Swift observes, he became a
statesman, and saw poets waiting at his levee, it was no wonder that
praise was accumulated upon him. Much likewise may be more honourably
ascribed to his personal character: he who, if he had claimed it, might
have obtained the diadem, was not likely to be denied the laurel. But
time quickly puts an end to artificial and accidental fame; and Addison
is to pass through futurity protected only by his genius. Every name
which kindness or interest once raised too high is in danger, lest the
next age should, by the vengeance of criticism, sink it in the same
proportion. A great writer has lately styled him "an indifferent poet,
and a worse critic." His poetry is first to be considered; of which
it must be confessed that it has not often those felicities of diction
which give lustre to sentiments, or that vigour of sentiment that
animates diction: there is little of ardour, vehemence, or transport;
there is very rarely the awfulness of grandeur, and not very often the
splendour of elegance. He thinks justly, but he thinks faintly. This is
his general character; to which, doubtless, many single passages will
furnish exception. Yet, if he seldom reaches supreme excellence,
he rarely sinks into dulness, and is still more rarely entangled in
absurdity. He did not trust his powers enough to be negligent. There is
in most of his compositions a calmness and equability, deliberate and
cautious, sometimes with little that delights, but seldom with anything
that offends. Of this kind seem to be his poems to Dryden, to Somers,
and to the King. His ode on St. Cecilia has been imitated by Pope, and
has something in it of Dryden's vigour. Of his Account of the English
Poets he used to speak as a "poor thing;" but it is not worse than his
usual strain. He has said, not very judiciously, in his character of
Waller--

     "Thy verse could show even Cromwell's innocence,
      And compliment the storms that bore him hence.
      Oh! had thy Muse not come an age too soon,
      But seen great Nassau on the British throne,
      How had his triumph glittered in thy page!"

What is this but to say that he who could compliment Cromwell had been
the proper poet for King William? Addison, however, printed the piece.

The Letter from Italy has been always praised, but has never been
praised beyond its merit. It is more correct, with less appearance of
labour, and more elegant, with less ambition of ornament, than any other
of his poems. There is, however, one broken metaphor, of which notice
may properly be taken:--

                         "Fired with that name--
      I bridle in my struggling Muse with pain,
      That longs to launch into a nobler strain."

To BRIDLE A GODDESS is no very delicate idea; but why must she be
BRIDLED? because she LONGS TO LAUNCH; an act which was never hindered by
a BRIDLE: and whither will she LAUNCH? into a NOBLER STRAIN. She is in
the first line a HORSE, in the second a BOAT; and the care of the poet
is to keep his HORSE or his BOAT from SINGING.

The next composition is the far-famed "Campaign," which Dr. Warton
has termed a "Gazette in Rhyme," with harshness not often used by the
good-nature of his criticism. Before a censure so severe is admitted,
let us consider that war is a frequent subject of poetry, and then
inquire who has described it with more justice and force. Many of our
own writers tried their powers upon this year of victory: yet Addison's
is confessedly the best performance; his poem is the work of a man not
blinded by the dust of learning; his images are not borrowed merely from
books. The superiority which he confers upon his hero is not personal
prowess and "mighty bone," but deliberate intrepidity, a calm command of
his passions, and the power of consulting his own mind in the midst of
danger. The rejection and contempt of fiction is rational and manly. It
may be observed that the last line is imitated by Pope:--

     "Marlb'rough's exploits appear divinely bright--
      Raised of themselves their genuine charms they boast,
      And those that paint them truest, praise them most."

This Pope had in his thoughts, but, not knowing how to use what was not
his own, he spoiled the thought when he had borrowed it:--

     "The well-sung woes shall soothe my pensive ghost;
      He best can paint them who shall feel them most."

Martial exploits may be PAINTED; perhaps WOES may be PAINTED; but they
are surely not PAINTED by being WELL SUNG: it is not easy to paint in
song, or to sing in colours.

No passage in the "Campaign" has been more often mentioned than the
simile of the angel, which is said in the Tatler to be "one of the
noblest thoughts that ever entered into the heart of man," and is
therefore worthy of attentive consideration. Let it be first inquired
whether it be a simile. A poetical simile is the discovery of likeness
between two actions in their general nature dissimilar, or of causes
terminating by different operations in some resemblance of effect. But
the mention of another like consequence from a like cause, or of a like
performance by a like agency, is not a simile, but an exemplification.
It is not a simile to say that the Thames waters fields, as the Po
waters fields; or that as Hecla vomits flames in Iceland, so AEtna
vomits flames in Sicily. When Horace says of Pindar that he pours his
violence and rapidity of verse, as a river swollen with rain rushes
from the mountain; or of himself, that his genius wanders in quest of
poetical decorations, as the bee wanders to collect honey; he, in either
case, produces a simile: the mind is impressed with the resemblance of
things generally unlike, as unlike as intellect and body. But if Pindar
had been described as writing with the copiousness and grandeur of
Homer, or Horace had told that he reviewed and finished his own poetry
with the same care as Isocrates polished his orations, instead of
similitude, he would have exhibited almost identity; he would have given
the same portraits with different names. In the poem now examined, when
the English are represented as gaining a fortified pass by repetition
of attack and perseverance of resolution, their obstinacy of courage
and vigour of onset are well illustrated by the sea that breaks, with
incessant battery, the dykes of Holland. This is a simile. But when
Addison, having celebrated the beauty of Marlborough's person, tells us
that "Achilles thus was formed of every grace," here is no simile, but a
mere exemplification. A simile may be compared to lines converging at
a point, and is more excellent as the lines approach from greater
distance: an exemplification may be considered as two parallel lines,
which run on together without approximation, never far separated, and
never joined.

Marlborough is so like the angel in the poem that the action of both is
almost the same, and performed by both in the same manner. Marlborough
"teaches the battle to rage;" the angel "directs the storm:" Marlborough
is "unmoved in peaceful thought;" the angel is "calm and serene:"
Marlborough stands "unmoved amidst the shock of hosts;" the angel rides
"calm in the whirlwind." The lines on Marlborough are just and noble,
but the simile gives almost the same images a second time. But
perhaps this thought, though hardly a simile, was remote from vulgar
conceptions, and required great labour and research, or dexterity of
application. Of this Dr. Madden, a name which Ireland ought to honour,
once gave me his opinion. "If I had set," said he, "ten schoolboys to
write on the battle of Blenheim, and eight had brought me the angel, I
should not have been surprised."

The opera of Rosamond, though it is seldom mentioned, is one of the
first of Addison's compositions. The subject is well chosen, the fiction
is pleasing, and the praise of Marlborough, for which the scene gives
an opportunity, is, what perhaps every human excellence must be, the
product of good luck improved by genius. The thoughts are sometimes
great, and sometimes tender; the versification is easy and gay. There is
doubtless some advantage in the shortness of the lines, which there is
little temptation to load with expletive epithets. The dialogue seems
commonly better than the songs. The two comic characters of Sir Trusty
and Grideline, though of no great value, are yet such as the poet
intended. Sir Trusty's account of the death of Rosamond is, I think,
too grossly absurd. The whole drama is airy and elegant; engaging in its
process, and pleasing in its conclusion. If Addison had cultivated the
lighter parts of poetry, he would probably have excelled.

The tragedy of Cato, which, contrary to the rule observed in selecting
the works of other poets, has by the weight of its character forced its
way into the late collection, is unquestionably the noblest production
of Addison's genius. Of a work so much read, it is difficult to say
anything new. About things on which the public thinks long, it commonly
attains to think right; and of Cato it has been not unjustly determined
that it is rather a poem in dialogue than a drama, rather a succession
of just sentiments in elegant language than a representation of natural
affections, or of any state probable or possible in human life. Nothing
here "excites or assuages emotion:" here is "no magical power of raising
phantastic terror or wild anxiety." The events are expected without
solicitude, and are remembered without joy or sorrow. Of the agents
we have no care; we consider not what they are doing, or what they are
suffering; we wish only to know what they have to say. Cato is a being
above our solicitude; a man of whom the gods take care, and whom we
leave to their care with heedless confidence. To the rest neither gods
nor men can have much attention; for there is not one amongst them that
strongly attracts either affection or esteem. But they are made the
vehicles of such sentiments and such expression that there is scarcely
a scene in the play which the reader does not wish to impress upon his
memory.

When Cato was shown to Pope, he advised the author to print it,
without any theatrical exhibition, supposing that it would be read more
favourably than heard. Addison declared himself of the same opinion, but
urged the importunity of his friends for its appearance on the stage.
The emulation of parties made it successful beyond expectation; and its
success has introduced or confirmed among us the use of dialogue
too declamatory, of unaffecting elegance, and chill philosophy. The
universality of applause, however it might quell the censure of common
mortals, had no other effect than to harden Dennis in fixed dislike; but
his dislike was not merely capricious. He found and showed many
faults; he showed them indeed with anger, but he found them indeed with
acuteness, such as ought to rescue his criticism from oblivion; though,
at last, it will have no other life than it derives from the work which
it endeavours to oppress. Why he pays no regard to the opinion of the
audience, he gives his reason by remarking that--

"A deference is to be paid to a general applause when it appears that
the applause is natural and spontaneous; but that little regard is to be
had to it when it is affected or artificial. Of all the tragedies
which in his memory have had vast and violent runs, not one has been
excellent, few have been tolerable, most have been scandalous. When a
poet writes a tragedy who knows he has judgment, and who feels he has
genius, that poet presumes upon his own merit, and scorns to make a
cabal. That people come coolly to the representation of such a tragedy,
without any violent expectation, or delusive imagination, or invincible
prepossession; that such an audience is liable to receive the
impressions which the poem shall naturally make on them, and to judge by
their own reason, and their own judgments; and that reason and judgment
are calm and serene, not formed by nature to make proselytes, and to
control and lord it over the imagination of others. But that when an
author writes a tragedy who knows he has neither genius nor judgment,
he has recourse to the making a party, and he endeavours to make up in
industry what is wanting in talent, and to supply by poetical craft
the absence of poetical art: that such an author is humbly contented to
raise men's passions by a plot without doors, since he despairs of doing
it by that which he brings upon the stage. That party and passion, and
prepossession, are clamorous and tumultuous things, and so much the
more clamorous and tumultuous by how much the more erroneous: that
they domineer and tyrannise over the imaginations of persons who want
judgment, and sometimes too of those who have it, and, like a fierce and
outrageous torrent, bear down all opposition before them."

He then condemns the neglect of poetical justice, which is one of his
favourite principles:--

"'Tis certainly the duty of every tragic poet, by the exact distribution
of poetical justice, to imitate the Divine Dispensation, and to
inculcate a particular Providence. 'Tis true, indeed, upon the stage of
the world, the wicked sometimes prosper and the guiltless suffer;
but that is permitted by the Governor of the World, to show, from the
attribute of His infinite justice, that there is a compensation in
futurity, to prove the immortality of the human soul, and the certainty
of future rewards and punishments. But the poetical persons in tragedy
exist no longer than the reading or the representation; the whole extent
of their enmity is circumscribed by those; and therefore, during that
reading or representation, according to their merits or demerits, they
must be punished or rewarded. If this is not done, there is no impartial
distribution of poetical justice, no instructive lecture of a particular
Providence, and no imitation of the Divine Dispensation. And yet the
author of this tragedy does not only run counter to this, in the fate
of his principal character; but everywhere, throughout it, makes virtue
suffer, and vice triumph: for not only Cato is vanquished by Caesar,
but the treachery and perfidiousness of Syphax prevail over the
honest simplicity and the credulity of Juba; and the sly subtlety
and dissimulation of Portius over the generous frankness and
open-heartedness of Marcus."

Whatever pleasure there may be in seeing crimes punished and virtue
rewarded, yet, since wickedness often prospers in real life, the poet is
certainly at liberty to give it prosperity on the stage. For if poetry
has an imitation of reality, how are its laws broken by exhibiting the
world in its true form? The stage may sometimes gratify our wishes; but
if it be truly the "MIRROR OF LIFE," it ought to show us sometimes what
we are to expect.

Dennis objects to the characters that they are not natural or
reasonable; but as heroes and heroines are not beings that are seen
every day, it is hard to find upon what principles their conduct shall
be tried. It is, however, not useless to consider what he says of the
manner in which Cato receives the account of his son's death:--

"Nor is the grief of Cato, in the fourth act, one jot more in nature
than that of his son and Lucia in the third. Cato receives the news
of his son's death, not only with dry eyes, but with a sort of
satisfaction; and in the same page sheds tears for the calamity of
his country, and does the same thing in the next page upon the bare
apprehension of the danger of his friends. Now, since the love of one's
country is the love of one's countrymen, as I have shown upon another
occasion, I desire to ask these questions:--Of all our countrymen, which
do we love most, those whom we know, or those whom we know not? And
of those whom we know, which do we cherish most, our friends or our
enemies? And of our friends, which are the dearest to us, those who are
related to us, or those who are not? And of all our relations, for which
have we most tenderness, for those who are near to us, or for those
who are remote? And of our near relations, which are the nearest, and
consequently the dearest to us, our offspring, or others? Our offspring,
most certainly; as Nature, or in other words Providence, has wisely
contrived for the preservation of mankind. Now, does it not follow,
from what has been said, that for a man to receive the news of his son's
death with dry eyes, and to weep at the same time for the calamities of
his country, is a wretched affectation and a miserable inconsistency?
Is not that, in plain English, to receive with dry eyes the news of the
deaths of those for whose sake our country is a name so dear to us, and
at the same time to shed tears for those for whose sakes our country is
not a name so dear to us?"

But this formidable assailant is less resistible when he attacks the
probability of the action and the reasonableness of the plan. Every
critical reader must remark that Addison has, with a scrupulosity almost
unexampled on the English stage, confined himself in time to a single
day, and in place to rigorous unity. The scene never changes, and the
whole action of the play passes in the great hall of Cato's house at
Utica. Much, therefore, is done in the hall for which any other place
had been more fit; and this impropriety affords Dennis many hints of
merriment and opportunities of triumph. The passage is long; but as such
disquisitions are not common, and the objections are skilfully formed
and vigorously urged, those who delight in critical controversy will not
think it tedious:--

"Upon the departure of Portius, Sempronius makes but one soliloquy,
and immediately in comes Syphax, and then the two politicians are at it
immediately. They lay their heads together, with their snuff-boxes in
their hands, as Mr. Bayes has it, and feague it away. But, in the
midst of that wise scene, Syphax seems to give a seasonable caution to
Sempronius:--

     "'SYPH.  But is it true, Sempronius, that your senate
   Is called together?  Gods! thou must be cautious;
   Cato has piercing eyes.'

"There is a great deal of caution shown, indeed, in meeting in a
governor's own hall to carry on their plot against him. Whatever opinion
they have of his eyes, I suppose they have none of his ears, or they
would never have talked at this foolish rate so near:--

     "'Gods! thou must be cautious.'

Oh! yes, very cautious: for if Cato should overhear you, and turn you
off for politicians, Caesar would never take you.

"When Cato, Act II., turns the senators out of the hall upon pretence of
acquainting Juba with the result of their debates, he appears to me to
do a thing which is neither reasonable nor civil. Juba might certainly
have better been made acquainted with the result of that debate in
some private apartment of the palace. But the poet was driven upon
this absurdity to make way for another, and that is to give Juba an
opportunity to demand Marcia of her father. But the quarrel and rage of
Juba and Syphax, in the same act; the invectives of Syphax against the
Romans and Cato; the advice that he gives Juba in her father's hall to
bear away Marcia by force; and his brutal and clamorous rage upon his
refusal, and at a time when Cato was scarcely out of sight, and perhaps
not out of hearing, at least some of his guards or domestics must
necessarily be supposed to be within hearing; is a thing that is so far
from being probable, that it is hardly possible.

"Sempronius, in the second act, comes back once more in the same morning
to the governor's hall to carry on the conspiracy with Syphax against
the governor, his country, and his family: which is so stupid that it is
below the wisdom of the O---s, the Macs, and the Teagues; even Eustace
Commins himself would never have gone to Justice-hall to have conspired
against the Government. If officers at Portsmouth should lay their heads
together in order to the carrying off J--- G---'s niece or daughter,
would they meet in J---G---'s hall to carry on that conspiracy? There
would be no necessity for their meeting there--at least, till they came
to the execution of their plot--because there would be other places
to meet in. There would be no probability that they should meet there,
because there would be places more private and more commodious. Now
there ought to be nothing in a tragical action but what is necessary or
probable.

"But treason is not the only thing that is carried on in this hall;
that, and love and philosophy take their turns in it, without any manner
of necessity or probability occasioned by the action, as duly and as
regularly, without interrupting one another, as if there were a triple
league between them, and a mutual agreement that each should give place
to and make way for the other in a due and orderly succession.

"We now come to the third act. Sempronius, in this act, comes into the
governor's hall with the leaders of the mutiny; but as soon as Cato is
gone, Sempronius, who but just before had acted like an unparalleled
knave, discovers himself, like an egregious fool, to be an accomplice in
the conspiracy.

     "'SEMP.  Know, villains, when such paltry slaves presume
   To mix in treason, if the plot succeeds,
   They're thrown neglected by; but, if it fails,
   They're sure to die like dogs, as you shall do.
   Here, take these factious monsters, drag them forth
   To sudden death.'

"'Tis true, indeed, the second leader says there are none there but
friends; but is that possible at such a juncture? Can a parcel of rogues
attempt to assassinate the governor of a town of war, in his own house,
in midday, and, after they are discovered and defeated, can there
be none near them but friends? Is it not plain, from these words of
Sempronius--

     "'Here, take these factious monsters, drag them forth
       To sudden death--'

and from the entrance of the guards upon the word of command, that
those guards were within ear-shot? Behold Sempronius, then, palpably
discovered. How comes it to pass, then, that instead of being hanged
up with the rest, he remains secure in the governor's hall, and there
carries on his conspiracy against the Government, the third time in the
same day, with his old comrade Syphax, who enters at the same time
that the guards are carrying away the leaders, big with the news of the
defeat of Sempronius?--though where he had his intelligence so soon is
difficult to imagine. And now the reader may expect a very extraordinary
scene. There is not abundance of spirit, indeed, nor a great deal of
passion, but there is wisdom more than enough to supply all defects.

     "'SYPH.  Our first design, my friend, has proved abortive;
   Still there remains an after-game to play:
   My troops are mounted; their Numidian steeds
   Snuff up the winds, and long to scour the desert.
   Let but Sempronius lead us in our flight,
   We'll force the gate where Marcus keeps his guard,
   And hew down all that would oppose our passage;
   A day will bring us into Caesar's camp.
       SEMP. Confusion! I have failed of half my purpose;
   Marcia, the charming Marcia's left behind.'

Well, but though he tells us the half-purpose he has failed of, he does
not tell us the half that he has carried. But what does he mean by

     "'Marcia, the charming Marcia's left behind'?

He is now in her own house! and we have neither seen her nor heard of
her anywhere else since the play began. But now let us hear Syphax:--

     "'What hinders, then, but that you find her out,
       And hurry her away by manly force?'

But what does old Syphax mean by finding her out? They talk as if she
were as hard to be found as a hare in a frosty morning.

     "'SEMP.  But how to gain admission?'

Oh! she is found out then, it seems.

     "'But how to gain admission? for access
       Is giv'n to none but Juba and her brothers.'

But, raillery apart, why access to Juba? For he was owned and received
as a lover neither by the father nor by the daughter. Well, but let
that pass. Syphax puts Sempronius out of pain immediately; and, being
a Numidian, abounding in wiles, supplies him with a stratagem for
admission that, I believe, is a nonpareil.

     "'SYPH.  Thou shalt have Juba's dress, and Juba's guards;
   The doors will open when Numidia's prince
   Seems to appear before them.'

"Sempronius is, it seems, to pass for Juba in full day at Cato's house,
where they were both so very well known, by having Juba's dress and his
guards; as if one of the Marshals of France could pass for the Duke of
Bavaria at noonday, at Versailles, by having his dress and liveries. But
how does Syphax pretend to help Sempronius to young Juba's dress?
Does he serve him in a double capacity, as general and master of his
wardrobe? But why Juba's guards? For the devil of any guards has Juba
appeared with yet. Well, though this is a mighty politic invention, yet,
methinks, they might have done without it: for, since the advice that
Syphax gave to Sempronius was

     "'To hurry her away by manly force,'

in my opinion the shortest and likeliest way of coming at the lady
was by demolishing, instead of putting on an impertinent disguise to
circumvent two or three slaves. But Sempronius, it seems, is of another
opinion. He extols to the skies the invention of old Syphax:--

     "'SEMP.  Heavens! what a thought was there!'

"Now, I appeal to the reader if I have not been as good as my word. Did
I not tell him that I would lay before him a very wise scene?

"But now let us lay before the reader that part of the scenery of the
fourth act which may show the absurdities which the author has run
into, through the indiscreet observance of the unity of place. I do not
remember that Aristotle has said anything expressly concerning the unity
of place. 'Tis true, implicitly he has said enough in the rules which he
has laid down for the chorus. For by making the chorus an essential
part of tragedy, and by bringing it on the stage immediately after the
opening of the scene, and retaining it there till the very catastrophe,
he has so determined and fixed the place of action that it was
impossible for an author on the Grecian stage to break through that
unity. I am of opinion that if a modern tragic poet can preserve the
amity of place, without destroying the probability of the incidents,
'tis always best for him to do it; because by the preservation of that
unity, as we have taken notice above, he adds grace and clearness and
comeliness to the representation. But since there are no express rules
about it, and we are under no compulsion to keep it, since we have
no chorus as the Grecian poet had; if it cannot be preserved without
rendering the greater part of the incidents unreasonable and absurd, and
perhaps sometimes monstrous, 'tis certainly better to break it.

"Now comes bully Sempronius, comically accoutred and equipped with his
Numidian dress and his Numidian guards. Let the reader attend to him
with all his ears, for the words of the wise are precious:--

     "'SEMP.  The deer is lodged; I've tracked her to her covert.'

"Now I would fain know why this deer is said to be lodged, since we
have not heard one word since the play began of her being at all out of
harbour: and if we consider the discourse with which she and Lucia begin
the act, we have reason to believe that they had hardly been talking
of such matters in the street. However, to pleasure Sempronius, let us
suppose, for once, that the deer is lodged:--

     "'The deer is lodged; I've tracked her to her covert.'

"If he had seen her in the open field, what occasion had he to track her
when he had so many Numidian dogs at his heels, which, with one halloo,
he might have set upon her haunches? If he did not see her in the
open field, how could he possibly track her? If he had seen her in the
street, why did he not set upon her in the street, since through the
street she must be carried at last? Now here, instead of having his
thoughts upon his business, and upon the present danger; instead of
meditating and contriving how he shall pass with his mistress through
the southern gate, where her brother Marcus is upon the guard, and where
he would certainly prove an impediment to him (which is the Roman word
for the BAGGAGE); instead of doing this, Sempronius is entertaining
himself with whimsies:--

        "'Semp.  How will the young Numidian rave to see
     His mistress lost!  If aught could glad my soul
     Beyond th' enjoyment of so bright a prize,
     'Twould be to torture that young, gay barbarian.
     But hark! what noise?  Death to my hopes! 'tis he,
     'Tis Juba's self!  There is but one way left!
     He must be murdered, and a passage cut
     Through those his guards.'

"Pray, what are 'those guards'? I thought at present that Juba's guards
had been Sempronius's tools, and had been dangling after his heels.

"But now let us sum up all these absurdities together. Sempronius goes
at noon-day, in Juba's clothes and with Juba's guards, to Cato's palace,
in order to pass for Juba, in a place where they were both so very well
known: he meets Juba there, and resolves to murder him with his own
guards. Upon the guards appearing a little bashful, he threatens them:--

     "'Hah! dastards, do you tremble?
      Or act like men; or, by yon azure heav'n!'--

"But the guards still remaining restive, Sempronius himself attacks
Juba, while each of the guards is representing Mr. Spectator's sign of
the Gaper, awed, it seems, and terrified by Sempronius's threats. Juba
kills Sempronius, and takes his own army prisoners, and carries them in
triumph away to Cato. Now I would fain know if any part of Mr. Bayes's
tragedy is so full of absurdity as this?

"Upon hearing the clash of swords, Lucia and Marcia come in. The
question is, why no men come in upon hearing the noise of swords in the
governor's hall? Where was the governor himself? Where were his guards?
Where were his servants? Such an attempt as this, so near the governor
of a place of war, was enough to alarm the whole garrison: and yet, for
almost half an hour after Sempronius was killed, we find none of those
appear who were the likeliest in the world to be alarmed; and the noise
of swords is made to draw only two poor women thither, who were most
certain to run away from it. Upon Lucia and Marcia's coming in, Lucia
appears in all the symptoms of an hysterical gentlewoman:--

        "'Luc.  Sure 'twas the clash of swords! my troubled heart
      Is so cast down, and sunk amidst its sorrows,
      It throbs with fear, and aches at every sound!'

And immediately her old whimsy returns upon her:--

     "O Marcia, should thy brothers, for my sake--
      I die away with horror at the thought.'

"She fancies that there can be no cutting of throats but it must be for
her. If this is tragical, I would fain know what is comical. Well, upon
this they spy the body of Sempronius; and Marcia, deluded by the habit,
it seems, takes him for Juba; for, says she,

     "'The face is muffled up within the garment.'

"Now, how a man could fight, and fall, with his face muffled up in his
garment, is, I think, a little hard to conceive! Besides, Juba, before
he killed him, knew him to be Sempronius. It was not by his garment
that he knew this; it was by his face, then: his face therefore was
not muffled. Upon seeing this man with his muffled face, Marcia falls
a-raving; and, owning her passion for the supposed defunct, begins to
make his funeral oration. Upon which Juba enters listening, I suppose
on tip-toe; for I cannot imagine how any one can enter listening in any
other posture. I would fain know how it came to pass that, during all
this time, he had sent nobody--no, not so much as a candle-snuffer--to
take away the dead body of Sempronius. Well, but let us regard him
listening. Having left his apprehension behind him, he, at first,
applies what Marcia says to Sempronius; but finding at last, with much
ado, that he himself is the happy man, he quits his eaves-dropping, and
discovers himself just time enough to prevent his being cuckolded by
a dead man, of whom the moment before he had appeared so jealous, and
greedily intercepts the bliss which was fondly designed for one who
could not be the better for it. But here I must ask a question: how
comes Juba to listen here, who had not listened before throughout the
play? Or how comes he to be the only person of this tragedy who listens,
when love and treason were so often talked in so public a place as a
hall? I am afraid the author was driven upon all these absurdities only
to introduce this miserable mistake of Marcia, which, after all, is
much below the dignity of tragedy; as anything is which is the effect or
result of trick.

"But let us come to the scenery of the fifth act. Cato appears first
upon the scene, sitting in a thoughtful posture; in his hand Plato's
Treatise on the Immortality of the Soul; a drawn sword on the table by
him. Now let us consider the place in which this sight is presented to
us. The place, forsooth, is a long hall. Let us suppose that any one
should place himself in this posture, in the midst of one of our halls
in London; that he should appear solus, in a sullen posture, a
drawn sword on the table by him; in his hand Plato's Treatise on the
Immortality of the Soul, translated lately by Bernard Lintot: I desire
the reader to consider whether such a person as this would pass with
them who beheld him for a great patriot, a great philosopher, or a
general, or some whimsical person who fancied himself all these? and
whether the people who belonged to the family would think that such a
person had a design upon their midriffs or his own?

"In short, that Cato should sit long enough in the aforesaid posture,
in the midst of this large hall, to read over Plato's Treatise on the
Immortality of the Soul, which is a lecture of two long hours; that he
should propose to himself to be private there upon that occasion; that
he should be angry with his son for intruding there; then that he should
leave this hall upon the pretence of sleep, give himself the mortal
wound in his bedchamber, and then be brought back into that hall to
expire, purely to show his good breeding, and save his friends the
trouble of coming up to his bedchamber; all this appears to me to be
improbable, incredible, impossible."

Such is the censure of Dennis. There is, as Dryden expresses it, perhaps
"too much horse-play in his railleries;" but if his jests are coarse,
his arguments are strong. Yet, as we love better to be pleased than
to be taught, Cato is read, and the critic is neglected. Flushed with
consciousness of these detections of absurdity in the conduct, he
afterwards attacked the sentiments of Cato; but he then amused himself
with petty cavils and minute objections.

Of Addison's smaller poems no particular mention is necessary; they have
little that can employ or require a critic. The parallel of the princes
and gods in his verses to Kneller is often happy, but is too well known
to be quoted. His translations, so far as I compared them, want the
exactness of a scholar. That he understood his authors, cannot be
doubted; but his versions will not teach others to understand them,
being too licentiously paraphrastical. They are, however, for the
most part, smooth and easy; and, what is the first excellence of a
translator, such as may be read with pleasure by those who do not know
the originals. His poetry is polished and pure; the product of a mind
too judicious to commit faults, but not sufficiently vigorous to attain
excellence. He has sometimes a striking line, or a shining paragraph;
but in the whole he is warm rather than fervid, and shows more dexterity
than strength. He was, however, one of our earliest examples of
correctness. The versification which he had learned from Dryden he
debased rather than refined. His rhymes are often dissonant; in his
Georgic he admits broken lines. He uses both triplets and Alexandrines,
but triplets more frequently in his translation than his other works.
The mere structure of verses seems never to have engaged much of his
care. But his lines are very smooth in Rosamond, and too smooth in Cato.

Addison is now to be considered as a critic: a name which the present
generation is scarcely willing to allow him. His criticism is condemned
as tentative or experimental rather than scientific; and he is
considered as deciding by taste rather than by principles.

It is not uncommon for those who have grown wise by the labour of others
to add a little of their own, and overlook their masters. Addison is now
despised by some who perhaps would never have seen his defects but by
the lights which he afforded them. That he always wrote as he would
think it necessary to write now, cannot be affirmed; his instructions
were such as the characters of his readers made proper. That general
knowledge which now circulates in common talk was in his time rarely
to be found. Men not professing learning were not ashamed of ignorance;
and, in the female world, any acquaintance with books was distinguished
only to be censured. His purpose was to infuse literary curiosity,
by gentle and unsuspected conveyance, into the gay, the idle, and the
wealthy; he therefore presented knowledge in the most alluring form,
not lofty and austere, but accessible and familiar. When he showed
them their defects, he showed them likewise that they might be easily
supplied. His attempt succeeded; inquiry was awakened, and comprehension
expanded. An emulation of intellectual elegance was excited, and from
this time to our own life has been gradually exalted, and conversation
purified and enlarged.

Dryden had, not many years before, scattered criticism over his prefaces
with very little parsimony; but though he sometimes condescended to be
somewhat familiar, his manner was in general too scholastic for
those who had yet their rudiments to learn, and found it not easy to
understand their master. His observations were framed rather for those
that were learning to write than for those that read only to talk.

An instructor like Addison was now wanting, whose remarks, being
superficial, might be easily understood, and being just, might prepare
the mind for more attainments. Had he presented "Paradise Lost" to
the public with all the pomp of system and severity of science, the
criticism would perhaps have been admired, and the poem still have been
neglected; but by the blandishments of gentleness and facility he has
made Milton an universal favourite, with whom readers of every class
think it necessary to be pleased. He descended now and then to lower
disquisitions: and by a serious display of the beauties of "Chevy Chase"
exposed himself to the ridicule of Wagstaff, who bestowed a like pompous
character on Tom Thumb; and to the contempt of Dennis, who, considering
the fundamental position of his criticism, that "Chevy Chase" pleases,
and ought to please, because it is natural, observes; "that there is a
way of deviating from nature, by bombast or tumour, which soars above
nature, and enlarges images beyond their real bulk; by affectation,
which forsakes nature in quest of something unsuitable; and by
imbecility, which degrades nature by faintness and diminution, by
obscuring its appearances, and weakening its effects." In "Chevy Chase"
there is not much of either bombast or affectation; but there is chill
and lifeless imbecility. The story cannot possibly be told in a manner
that shall make less impression on the mind.

Before the profound observers of the present race repose too securely on
the consciousness of their superiority to Addison, let them consider
his Remarks on Ovid, in which may be found specimens of criticism
sufficiently subtle and refined: let them peruse likewise his Essays on
Wit, and on the Pleasures of Imagination, in which he founds art on the
base of nature, and draws the principles of invention from dispositions
inherent in the mind of man with skill and elegance, such as his
contemners will not easily attain.

As a describer of life and manners, he must be allowed to stand perhaps
the first of the first rank. His humour, which, as Steele observes,
is peculiar to himself, is so happily diffused as to give the grace of
novelty to domestic scenes and daily occurrences. He never "o'ersteps
the modesty of nature," nor raises merriment or wonder by the violation
of truth. His figures neither divert by distortion nor amaze by
aggravation. He copies life with so much fidelity that he can be hardly
said to invent; yet his exhibitions have an air so much original, that
it is difficult to suppose them not merely the product of imagination.

As a teacher of wisdom, he may be confidently followed. His religion has
nothing in it enthusiastic or superstitious: he appears neither weakly
credulous nor wantonly sceptical; his morality is neither dangerously
lax nor impracticably rigid. All the enchantment of fancy, and all the
cogency of argument, are employed to recommend to the reader his real
interest, the care of pleasing the Author of his being. Truth is shown
sometimes as the phantom of a vision; sometimes appears half-veiled
in an allegory; sometimes attracts regard in the robes of fancy; and
sometimes steps forth in the confidence of reason. She wears a thousand
dresses, and in all is pleasing.

     "Mille habet ornatus, mille decenter habet."

His prose is the model of the middle style; on grave subjects not
formal, on light occasions not grovelling; pure without scrupulosity,
and exact without apparent elaboration; always equable, and always easy,
without glowing words or pointed sentences. Addison never deviates from
his track to snatch a grace; he seeks no ambitious ornaments, and tries
no hazardous innovations. His page is always luminous, but never blazes
in unexpected splendour.

It was apparently his principal endeavour to avoid all harshness
and severity of diction; he is therefore sometimes verbose in his
transitions and connections, and sometimes descends too much to the
language of conversation; yet if his language had been less idiomatical
it might have lost somewhat of its genuine Anglicism. What he attempted,
he performed; he is never feeble and he did not wish to be energetic;
he is never rapid and he never stagnates. His sentences have neither
studied amplitude nor affected brevity; his periods, though not
diligently rounded, are voluble and easy. Whoever wishes to attain
an English style, familiar but not coarse, and elegant but not
ostentatious, must give his days and nights to the volumes of Addison.
